DOCS-600: pi plant watering tutorial (#909)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/pi/make-a-plant-watering-robot.md

Navigate to the directory you created when [testing your soil moisture readings](#test-your-soil-moisture-readings-on-your-pi), `plant-watering-robot`, and create a new file, <file>sensor.py</file>.

For example, run the following commands to create and open the file:

``` shell
cd plant-watering-robot
touch sensor.py
vim sensor.py
```

Paste the following code into <file>sensor.py</file>:

```python
import asyncio

from viam.components.sensor import Sensor
from viam.rpc.server import Server

import busio
import digitalio
import board
import adafruit_mcp3xxx.mcp3008 as MCP
from adafruit_mcp3xxx.analog_in import AnalogIn
import RPi.GPIO as GPIO

class MoistureSensor(Sensor):

   def __init__(self, name: str):
        super(MoistureSensor,self).__init__(name)
        sensor_pin = 4
        GPIO.setmode(GPIO.BCM)
        GPIO.setup(sensor_pin, GPIO.IN)

    # Implement the Viam Sensor API's get_readings() method
    async def get_readings(self):
        x = 0
        input = []

        # create the spi bus
        spi = busio.SPI(clock=board.SCK, MISO=board.MISO, MOSI=board.MOSI)

        # create the cs (chip select)

>         cs = digitalio.DigitalInOut(board.D25) # TODO: Need to check this: example was D5. Documentation is confusing.

Author: This & the other place with TODO / `.D25` will be edited, I had to update Olivia's original code https://docs.google.com/document/d/16hZ98EsN5r9P1GU8gQDwVYXhyzv_kp5M/edit# to use a new library

        # create the mcp object
        mcp = MCP.MCP3008(spi, cs)

        # create an analog input channel on pin 0
        chan = AnalogIn(mcp, MCP.P0)

        while x<10:
            # read adc channel 0
            reading = chan.value
            input.append(reading)
            x+=1

        return input

async def main():
   srv = Server(components=[MoistureSensor("moisture_sensor")])
   await srv.serve()

if __name__ == "__main__":
   asyncio.run(main())
```

You can modify this example code as necessary.

Now, go back to your robot's page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and navigate to the **CONFIG** tab, then to the **REMOTES** sub-tab.

> Add your sensor server as a remote part, called `my-sensor-server`:

Author: Can link to remotes docs here when it comes through

4. Connect the PWM pin on the pump to [Pin 12](https://pinout.xyz/pinout/pin12_gpio18) of the Pi.
5. Connect the plastic tubing to the pump. Put the suction end inside of your water box, and the output end inside of your plant box.

### Wiring Diagram

Refer to the following full wiring diagram for your hardware setup:

![The full wiring diagram for all the hardware for the Plant Watering Robot.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/full-wiring.png)

## Program Your Plant Watering Robot

### Enable SPI on your Pi

Now that you have wired your ADC and Moisture Sensor, make sure that SPI is enabled on your Pi.

SSH into your Pi and run the following command:

``` shell
sudo raspi-config
```

Once the `raspi-config` interface is open, navigate to **Interface Options**:

![Raspi-config Tool interface with Interface Options selected.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/interface-options.png)

Then, click on **SPI**:

![Raspi-config Tool interface with SPI selected.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/spi.png)

Now, click **Yes** to enable SPI:

![Raspi-config Tool interface with Yes selected for SPI enablement.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/spi-enabled.png)

Finally, click **Finish** and restart your Pi.

> ### Test your Soil Moisture readings on your Pi

Reviewer: It might be nicer if we had a tutorial repository that allowed for simple install of these python dependancies as part of a modular resource installation.  Then, they could also test via the CONTROL tab vs command line.  But, we could always improve that later.

Author: I can bench this and the modular resource update for after I do the full setup with the parts in. That will take a bit more time for me. I was able to test all the SPI instructions & the sensor code-- I don't have the MCP3008 so it wasn't reading anything, but it does work

Author: LMK what you think @mcvella

Author: ok, sounds good

---

> title: "How to Make a Plant Watering Robot with a Raspberry Pi"
> linkTitle: "Make a Plant Watering Robot with a Pi"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Plant Watering Robot with a Raspberry Pi"
linkTitle: "Watering Robot"
```

i want us to get away from having "How to" in almost all titles for tutorials. It doesn't add any useful info.

weight: 50
type: "docs"

> description: "Instructions for creating a plant watering robot with a Raspberry Pi single-board computer and Viam."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "Create a plant watering robot with a Raspberry Pi single-board computer."
```

All of our tutorials feature Viam - again, something I want us to stop doing

Author: lgtm, done!

tags: ["raspberry pi", "app", "board", "motor"]
# SMES: Olivia Miller
---

![Picture of the plant watering robot on a desk.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/plant-watering-robot.png)

## Getting Started

> 

Author: done!

Building a useful robot doesn't have to require complicated code or expensive equipment.
With a Raspberry Pi and some cheap, basic hardware, you can keep your plants healthy and happy from anywhere in the world!

> Follow this tutorial to learn how to set up an automatic plant watering system, as pictured above.

Author: done!

You can leave this plant watering robot on your windowsill or desk, refill the water supply as needed, and easily program the system to your specifications for watering your plants.

> Complete the physical assembly and wiring, [create and connect to a new robot](#configure-the-components-of-your-robot-in-the-viam-app), [configure your robot's components](#configure-the-components-of-your-robot-in-the-viam-app), [configure a custom Capacitive Soil Moisture model](#configure-the-capacitive-soil-moisture-sensor-as-a-custom-sensor-component-model) [sensor](/components/sensor) component, and [code a Python file utilizing the Viam Python SDK](#add-python-control-code) to control the plant watering robot with `viam-server` and your Pi.

Author: added, will add link for first!

> Completing this tutorial requires the following hardware:

Author: done!

- A [Peristaltic Pump](https://www.amazon.com/Gikfun-Peristaltic-Connector-Aquarium-Analytic/dp/B01IUVHB8E/ref=asc_df_B01IUVHB8E/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=198093101467&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=13835398343702336934&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-384674250225&psc=1) motor and [tubing](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08H1ZD5VZ?psc=1&ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_product_details)
- An [Adafruit MCP3008 ADC](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00NAY3RB2?psc=1&ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_product_details)
- A [Motor Speed Controller](https://www.amazon.com/CHENBO-Trigger-Adjustment-Electronic-Controller/dp/B099RF72R1/ref=asc_df_B099RF72R1/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=532384528241&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=11376239784428845641&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-1410298730875&th=1)
- A Breadboard
- 9V Battery
- Plant Box
- Water Cup or Box

> Before starting this tutorial, follow the [Raspberry Pi Setup Guide](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/) to prepare your Pi to run `viam-server`.
> Make sure your Pi is flashed with a Viam-compatible operating system, and that you are able to SSH into it.

Reviewer 2: Since you instruct them to do this in the configuration section you can remove it here
```suggestion
```

Author: This is actually a different guide than I am directing them to below-- would not want them to have to reflash after doing the SPI enablement/testing, but they don't need to create a new robot/install until after assembly and testing is done

## Set Up your Plant Watering Robot

Before programming the Pi to make the plant watering robot functional, you need to physically set up the plant watering robot by wiring the different parts together.

> Doing so ensures that the signals from the capacitive soil moisture sensor can be processed by the Pi, and that the Pi can signal to the peristaltic pump when it is time to pump water from the water's box to the plant's box.

Author: done lmk what you think!

### Wire your ADC

> Wiring an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) between your capacitive soil moisture sensor and Pi ensures that the analog signals created by the capacitive soil moisture sensor's readings can be processed by the Pi, which expects digital signals to come to it through its GPIO pins.

Author: this makes sense, done!

> First, start by wiring your ADC to your Raspberry Pi board.

Author: done!

> Refer to the following pinout diagram for your MCP3008 Analog to Digital Converter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Start by wiring your ADC to your Raspberry Pi board according to the following pinout diagram for your MCP3008 Analog to Digital Converter:
```

![Pinout diagram for the ADC.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/adc-pinout.png)

> Consult your Raspberry Pi's data sheet or [this resource](https://pinout.xyz/pinout/3v3_power) for your board's pinout diagram.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consult your Raspberry Pi's data sheet or [pinout.xyz](https://pinout.xyz/pinout/3v3_power) for your board's pinout diagram.
```

Wire the pins as follows:

| MCP3008 ADC Pin | Raspberry Pi Pin |
| ----------- | ---------------- |
| VDD | 3.3V |
| VREF | 3.3V |
| AGND | GND |
| DGND | GND |
| CLK | SCLK |
| DOUT | MISO |
| DIN | MOSI |
| CS/SHDN | GPIO25 |

> [**Wiring Diagram**](#wiring-diagram)

Reviewer 2: Put the diagram here directly

### Wire your Soil Moisture Sensor

Next, wire your capacitive soil moisture sensor to your Pi and ADC.

Refer to the following pinout diagram for your capacitive soil moisture sensor:

![Pinout diagram for the capacitive soil moisture sensor.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/moisture-sensor-pinout.png)

Wire the pins as follows:

| Pi | ADC |
|--|--|
|<table> <tr><th>Moisture Sensor Pin</th><th>Raspberry Pi Pin</th></tr><tr><td>VCC</td><td>3.3V</td></tr><tr><td>GND</td><td>GND</td></tr> </table>| <table> <tr><th>Moisture Sensor Pin</th><th>MCP3008 ADC Pin</th></tr><tr><td>A0 (Analog Signal Output)</td><td>CH0</td></tr> </table>|

> Put the soil moisture sensor inside of your plant box.

Reviewer 2: before wiring it? I guess that works

> [**Wiring Diagram**](#wiring-diagram)

Reviewer 2: Here you can add link back up but add a sentence for it

### Wire your Pump

Now, wire and power your Peristaltic Pump [motor](/components/motor/) to complete your hardware setup.

1. Connect your battery to the DC power pins on your motor speed controller.
2. Then, connect the output pins on your motor speed controller to the pump.
3. Connect the GND pin on the pump to the breadboard and terminal.
4. Connect the PWM pin on the pump to [Pin 12](https://pinout.xyz/pinout/pin12_gpio18) of the Pi.
5. Connect the plastic tubing to the pump. Put the suction end inside of your water box, and the output end inside of your plant box.

> ### Wiring Diagram
> 
> Refer to the following full wiring diagram for your hardware setup:
> 
> ![The full wiring diagram for all the hardware for the Plant Watering Robot.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/full-wiring.png)

Reviewer 2: Just remove all of that and move it up
```suggestion
```

## Program Your Plant Watering Robot

### Enable SPI on your Pi

> Now that you have wired your ADC and Moisture Sensor, make sure that SPI is enabled on your Pi.

Reviewer 2: Spell out SPI on first use

Author: done!

SSH into your Pi and run the following command:

``` shell
sudo raspi-config
```

Once the `raspi-config` interface is open, navigate to **Interface Options**:

![Raspi-config Tool interface with Interface Options selected.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/interface-options.png)

> Then, click on **SPI**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, select **SPI**:
```

I think you  can't actually click

Author: done!

![Raspi-config Tool interface with SPI selected.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/spi.png)

> Now, click **Yes** to enable SPI:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, select **Yes** to enable SPI:
```

![Raspi-config Tool interface with Yes selected for SPI enablement.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/spi-enabled.png)

> Finally, click **Finish** and restart your Pi.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, select **Finish** and restart your Pi.
```

### Test your Soil Moisture readings on your Pi

Next, install the Adafruit ADC library [`Adafruit_CircuitPython_MCP3xxx`](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_CircuitPython_MCP3xxx/) on your Pi.

> First, make sure you have installed the required dependencies:

Reviewer 2: This is the first time you mention them so just instruct them to install them instead of saying make sure you have them installed

- [Adafruit CircuitPython](https://github.com/adafruit/circuitpython)
- [Bus Device](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_CircuitPython_BusDevice)

If you do not have these, download the Adafruit library and driver bundle to your Pi by following the instructions [here](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_CircuitPython_Bundle).

Run the following command while connected to your Pi with SSH to install [`Adafruit_CircuitPython_MCP3xxx`](https://github.com/adafruit/Adafruit_CircuitPython_MCP3xxx/):

``` shell
pip3 install adafruit-circuitpython-mcp3xxx
```

Create a new directory for your plant watering robot's files and navigate to this directory in your terminal session.
For example, run the following commands:

``` shell
mkdir plant-watering-robot
cd plant-watering-robot
```

> After navigating to this directory, make a new Python file called `adctesting` and open up the file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After navigating to this directory, create a new Python file called <file>adctesting.py</file> and open up the file.
```

For example, run the following commands:

``` shell
touch adctesting.py
vim adctesting.py
```

> Now, add the following Python code to `adctesting.py` to test reading values from your capacitive soil moisture sensor through your MCP3008 ADC:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, add the following Python code to <file>adctesting.py</file> to test reading values from your capacitive soil moisture sensor through your MCP3008 ADC:
```

``` python
import time
import busio
import digitalio
import board
import adafruit_mcp3xxx.mcp3008 as MCP
from adafruit_mcp3xxx.analog_in import AnalogIn

# create the spi bus
spi = busio.SPI(clock=board.SCK, MISO=board.MISO, MOSI=board.MOSI)

# create the cs (chip select)
cs = digitalio.DigitalInOut(board.D25) # TODO: Need to check this: example was D5. Documentation is confusing.

# create the mcp object
mcp = MCP.MCP3008(spi, cs)

# create an analog input channel on pin 0
chan = AnalogIn(mcp, MCP.P0)

print('Reading MCP3008 values, press Ctrl-C to quit...')
while True:
    print('Raw ADC Value: ', chan.value)
    time.sleep(1)
```

Run the code as follows:

``` shell
sudo python3 adctesting.py
```

> When running this code, you should see the Moisture Sensor values outputted by the MCP3008 in the range of `0` to `1023`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When running this code, you should see the moisture sensor values from the MCP3008 in the range of `0` to `1023`.
```

That's a weird range that might be worth commenting on if you know why it is that but if now - leave it for now since this is urgent

Test your sensor by putting it in air, water, and different soils to see how the values change.

> An example output:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done!

![Terminal output of capacitive soil moisture sensor values.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/moisture-sensor-output.png)

### Configure the Components of your Robot in the Viam app

Follow [this guide](/installation/install/) to install `viam-server` on your pi, create a new robot, and connect to it on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

> After navigating to your new robot's page on the app, click on the **CONFIG** tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, navigate to your new robot's page on the app and click on the **CONFIG** tab.
```

Author: done!

> First, add your Pi as a [board component](/components/board/):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, add your Pi as a [board component](/components/board/) by creating a new component with **type** `board` and **model** `pi`. 
```

^ be a bit more specific.

{{< tabs name="Configure an Pi Board" >}}
{{% tab name="Config Builder" %}}

<img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/pi-board-config-builder.png" alt="Creation of a pi board in the Viam app config builder." style="max-width:800px" />

> {{% /tab %}}

Reviewer 2: beautiful tabs!

{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "components": [
    {
      "name": "local",
      "type": "board",
      "model": "pi",
      "attributes": {},
      "depends_on": []
    }, // Motor JSON ...
  ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

<br>

> Then, add your pump as a [motor component](/components/motor/).
> 
> Make sure to add your board (in this example, named `local`) to this component's `depends_on`, and `"max_rpm": 1000` and `"pwm": "12"` (the pin # that you wired the PWM to) to `attributes`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, add your pump as a [motor component](/components/motor/) by adding a new component with **type** `motor` and **model** `gpio`.

Add your board (in this example, named `local`) to this component's dependencies (`depends_on`) and set the attributes **Max RPM** to `1000` and **PWM**  to `12` (the pin # that you wired the PWM to).
```

Author: done!

{{< tabs name="Configure an Pump Motor" >}}
{{% tab name="Config Builder" %}}

<img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/pump-motor-config-builder.png" alt="Creation of a pump motor in the Viam app config builder." style="max-width:800px" />

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
// Board JSON ... },
{
    "name": "water-pump",
    "type": "motor",
    "model": "gpio",
    "attributes": {
    "pins": {
        "a": "",
        "b": "",
        "dir": "",
        "pwm": "12"
    },
    "board": "local",
    "max_rpm": 1000
    },
    "depends_on": [
    "local"
    ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Configure the Capacitive Soil Moisture Sensor as a Custom Sensor Component Model

> As the capacitive soil moisture sensor is not currently one of Viam's built-in [sensor component](/components/sensor/) models, you now must use the Viam Python SDK to configure this sensor as a [custom resource](/program/extend/sdk-as-server/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the capacitive soil moisture sensor is not currently one of Viam's built-in [sensor component](/components/sensor/) models, you have to use the Viam Python SDK to configure this sensor as a [custom resource](/program/extend/sdk-as-server/).
```

> - In this case, the custom resource is a custom component model that extends the Viam [sensor class](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/components/sensor/sensor/index.html).
> - You instantiate this custom component as a server with the `viam.rpc.server` class.
> - Then, you add the component server as a remote part of your `plant-watering-robot`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, the custom resource is a custom component model that extends the Viam [sensor class](https://python.viam.dev/autoapi/viam/components/sensor/sensor/index.html).
To use the custom component, you create a server using the `viam.rpc.server` class and once the server is running you add the server as a remote part of your `plant-watering-robot`.
```

Author: done! Thanks for the explanation/help

If you haven't already, install the Viam Python SDK by following the instructions [here](https://python.viam.dev/).

Navigate to the directory you created when [testing your soil moisture readings](#test-your-soil-moisture-readings-on-your-pi), `plant-watering-robot`, and create a new file, <file>sensor.py</file>.

For example, run the following commands to create and open the file:

``` shell
cd plant-watering-robot
touch sensor.py

> vim sensor.py

Reviewer 2: people may not know vim. Just tell them to open the file and paste into it
```suggestion
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  // "components": [ board & motor ... ] ,
  // "remotes" [ my-sensor-server ... ] ,
  "processes": [
    {
      "id": "run-sensor-server",
      "log": true,
      "name": "sudo",
      "args": [
        "-u",
        "<my_username>",
        "python",
        "sensor.py"
      ],
      "cwd": "/home/<my_username>/plant-watering-robot"
    }
  ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Add Python Control Code

Follow these instructions to start working on your Python Control Code:

1. Navigate to your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com), and click on the **CODE SAMPLE** tab.
Follow the instructions in this tab.
2. Click **COPY CODE** to copy a code sample that establishes a connection with your robot when run.
3. Paste this code sample into a new file in your `plant-watering-robot` directory.
4. Name the file <file>plant-watering-robot.py</file>, and save it.
  
For example, run the following commands to create and open the file:

``` shell
cd plant-watering-robot
touch plant-watering-robot.py
vim plant-watering-robot.py

> ```

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is actually helpful here. You give instructions above and people will use the tools they are familiar with
```suggestion
```

Now, you can add code into <file>plant-watering-robot.py</file> to write the logic that defines your plant watering system.

> <img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/main-py.png" alt="The main.py function from your robot's Code Sample tab, ready to edit." style="max-width:800px" />

Reviewer 2: Instead of this explain where to add it

Author: Tried to address lmk what you think

<br>
</br>

Use the Viam [motor](/components/motor#api) and [sensor](/components/sensor#control-your-sensor-with-viams-client-sdk-libraries) API methods.

> Determine at what [analog value from the Soil Moisture readings](#test-your-soil-moisture-readings-on-your-pi) you want to water your plant.

Reviewer 2: can you give an example? Or a reasonable start value?

Reviewer 2: or tell them to use the value from earlier testing

Author: lmk how change looks haha

Also, consider how often you would like to check the moisture levels of the plant, and how long the plant should be watered.

You can get your components from the robot like this:

```python

> sensor = Sensor.from_robot(robot = robot, name = 'moisture_sensor') # Note that this name, `moisture_sensor`, is defined in sensor.py
> water_pump = Motor.from_robot(robot = robot, name = 'water_pump')

Reviewer 2: pretty sure that's not very pythonic
```suggestion
sensor = Sensor.from_robot(robot=robot, name='moisture_sensor') # Note that this name, `moisture_sensor`, is defined in sensor.py
water_pump = Motor.from_robot(robot=robot, name='water_pump')
```

Author: done, lgtm!

```

And you can add your system logic to run continuously like this:

```python
 while True:

    # Get moisture sensor readings
    readings = await sensor.get_readings()
    print(readings)
    avg = sum(readings) / len(readings)
    sleep(1)

    if(avg > 950):
    print('needs water')

    # Run for 20 seconds
    await water_pump.go_for(1000,200)

    # Wait for the water to soak in
    sleep(5)

    # Recheck the avg
    readings = await sensor.get_readings()
    print(readings)
    avg = sum(readings) / len(readings)
    sleep(1)
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you add the full code at the end here in case folks get lost? And link to it from the beginning of the tutorial?

Author: @npentrel Olivia did not provide full code, and the full code would differ per-robot, so I'm not sure if this would be reasonable-- @mcvella what do you think? 

I would normally be inclined to add. Maybe just a full `main()` function?

Reviewer: Usually we'd have code in a repo somewhere unless its very small, in which case it could be embedded in the tutorial.  I think readers appreciate being able to just copy/paste (and add credentials) and be off and running.

Reviewer: but main function at minimum would be better I think

Reviewer 2: I suppose you got it to fully work with the robot so you could put that in a gist (gist.github.com) and link that?

## Next Steps

> Now that you have created your automatic plant watering system with a capacitive soil moisture sensor, you can easily use Viam to automate other aspects of your garden.
> 
> For example, you can use a [light sensor](https://www.amazon.com/Sensor-Module-Raspberry-Integrated-Circuits/dp/B07L15M5JG) or a [temperature sensor](https://www.amazon.com/KY-011-Cathode-Arduino-Starter-2-color/dp/B07869PKKF/ref=as_li_ss_tl?keywords=arduino+two+color+led+module&qid=1556591832&s=gateway&sr=8-2&th=1&linkCode=sl1&tag=murraynet-20&linkId=c36cd98be29498a9883b656c7011b6bb&language=en_US)!

Reviewer 2: Maybe slightly better
```suggestion
Now that you have created your automatic plant watering system with a capacitive soil moisture sensor, you can easily use Viam to automate other aspects of your garden.
For example, you can use a [light sensor](https://www.amazon.com/Sensor-Module-Raspberry-Integrated-Circuits/dp/B07L15M5JG) or a [temperature sensor](https://www.amazon.com/KY-011-Cathode-Arduino-Starter-2-color/dp/B07869PKKF/ref=as_li_ss_tl?keywords=arduino+two+color+led+module&qid=1556591832&s=gateway&sr=8-2&th=1&linkCode=sl1&tag=murraynet-20&linkId=c36cd98be29498a9883b656c7011b6bb&language=en_US)!
If you build something based on this please share it in our [Community Discord](https://discord.gg/viam)  - we'd love to see it.
```

---
title: "Plant Watering Robot with a Raspberry Pi"

> linkTitle: "Watering Robot"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: "Plant Watering Robot"
```

Author: done if this is ok with you @npentrel !

weight: 50
type: "docs"
description: "Create a plant watering robot with a Raspberry Pi single-board computer."
tags: ["raspberry pi", "app", "board", "motor"]
# SMES: Olivia Miller
---

![Picture of the plant watering robot on a desk.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/plant-watering-robot.png)

Building a useful robot doesn't have to require complicated code or expensive equipment.
With a Raspberry Pi and some cheap, basic hardware, you can keep your plants healthy and happy from anywhere in the world!

Follow this tutorial to learn how to set up an automatic plant watering system:

> 1.  [Complete the physical assembly and wiring](/#set-up-your-plant-watering-robot).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  [Complete the physical assembly and wiring](#set-up-your-plant-watering-robot).
```

2. [Create and connect to the robot](#configure-the-components-of-your-robot-in-the-viam-app).
3. [Configure your robot's components](#configure-the-components-of-your-robot-in-the-viam-app).
4. [Configure a custom Capacitive Soil Moisture sensor component](#configure-the-capacitive-soil-moisture-sensor-as-a-custom-sensor-component-model).
5. [Write code utilizing the Viam Python SDK to control the plant watering robot](#add-python-control-code).

The tutorial uses the following hardware, but you can adjust it as needed:

> - A Raspberry Pi with SD card

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Raspberry Pi 3B or 4B with SD card
```
Since others won't currently work - I think actually a W 2 Zero will - but the instructions here are for the pin layout etc of the 3B/4B

> - A [Capacitive Soil Moisture Sensor](https://www.amazon.com/KeeYees-Sensitivity-Moisture-Watering-Manager/dp/B07QXZC8TQ/ref=asc_df_B07QXZC8TQ/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=343238573411&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=14606440922488452520&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-757549749596&psc=1&tag=&ref=&adgrpid=71762478951&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvadid=343238573411&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=14606440922488452520&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-757549749596)

Reviewer: nit: any amazon URLS can be shortened by removing from ref= and beyond

Author: thank you, was not aware of this! Done

- An [Adafruit MCP3008 ADC](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00NAY3RB2?psc=1&ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_product_details)
- A [Motor Speed Controller](https://www.amazon.com/CHENBO-Trigger-Adjustment-Electronic-Controller/dp/B099RF72R1/ref=asc_df_B099RF72R1/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=532384528241&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=11376239784428845641&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-1410298730875&th=1)
- A Breadboard
- 9V Battery
- Plant Box
- Water Cup or Box

Before starting this tutorial, follow the [Raspberry Pi Setup Guide](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/) to prepare your Pi to run `viam-server`.
Make sure your Pi is flashed with a Viam-compatible operating system, and that you are able to SSH into it.

## Set Up your Plant Watering Robot

> Before programming the Pi to make the plant watering robot functional, you need to physically set up the plant watering robot by wiring the different parts together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before programming the Pi to make the plant watering robot functional, you need to physically set up the plant watering robot by wiring the different components together.
```

Since we use part to mean something else at Viam?

Author: Yes, done!

You will set up the robot to receive signals from the capacitive soil moisture sensor and signal to the peristaltic pump when it is time to pump water from the water's box to the plant's box.

### Wire your ADC

> The analog-to-digital converter (ADC) between your capacitive soil moisture sensor and Pi converts the analog signals created by the capacitive soil moisture sensor's readings to digital signals that can be processed by your Pi, which expects digital signals to come to it through its GPIO pins.

Reviewer: nice!

> Start by wiring your ADC to your Raspberry Pi board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

dupe

Author: oops, done!

Start by wiring your ADC to your Raspberry Pi board according to the following pinout diagram for your MCP3008 Analog to Digital Converter:

![Pinout diagram for the ADC.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/adc-pinout.png)

Consult your Raspberry Pi's data sheet or [pinout.xyz](https://pinout.xyz/pinout/3v3_power) for your board's pinout diagram.

Wire the pins as follows:

| MCP3008 ADC Pin | Raspberry Pi Pin |
| ----------- | ---------------- |
| VDD | 3.3V |
| VREF | 3.3V |
| AGND | GND |
| DGND | GND |
| CLK | SCLK |
| DOUT | MISO |
| DIN | MOSI |
| CS/SHDN | GPIO25 |

> #### Wiring Diagram

Author: Would remove but it helps to be able to link to this from the other wiring steps? WDYT

> #### Wiring Diagram

Reviewer: Oh, that's interesting.  Looks like you can create an anchor link in other ways: https://discourse.gohugo.io/t/creating-anchors-in-hugo-pages-solved/9552

|<table> <tr><th>Moisture Sensor Pin</th><th>Raspberry Pi Pin</th></tr><tr><td>VCC</td><td>3.3V</td></tr><tr><td>GND</td><td>GND</td></tr> </table>| <table> <tr><th>Moisture Sensor Pin</th><th>MCP3008 ADC Pin</th></tr><tr><td>A0 (Analog Signal Output)</td><td>CH0</td></tr> </table>|

Put the soil moisture sensor inside of your plant box.

Refer to the following full wiring diagram for your hardware setup: [**Wiring Diagram**](#wiring-diagram)

### Wire your Pump

Now, wire and power your Peristaltic Pump [motor](/components/motor/) to complete your hardware setup.

1. Connect your battery to the DC power pins on your motor speed controller.
2. Then, connect the output pins on your motor speed controller to the pump.
3. Connect the GND pin on the pump to the breadboard and terminal.
4. Connect the PWM pin on the pump to [Pin 12](https://pinout.xyz/pinout/pin12_gpio18) of the Pi.
5. Connect the plastic tubing to the pump. Put the suction end inside of your water box, and the output end inside of your plant box.

Refer to the following full wiring diagram for your hardware setup: [**Wiring Diagram**](#wiring-diagram)

## Program Your Plant Watering Robot

### Enable SPI on your Pi

> Now that you have wired your ADC and Moisture Sensor, make sure that the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) is enabled on your Pi.

Author: think I have addressed, LMK

   def __init__(self, name: str):
        super(MoistureSensor,self).__init__(name)
        sensor_pin = 4
        GPIO.setmode(GPIO.BCM)
        GPIO.setup(sensor_pin, GPIO.IN)

    # Implement the Viam Sensor API's get_readings() method
    async def get_readings(self):
        x = 0
        input = []

        # Create the SPI bus
        spi = busio.SPI(clock=board.SCK, MISO=board.MISO, MOSI=board.MOSI)

        # Create the cs (chip select)
        cs = digitalio.DigitalInOut(board.D25)

        # Create the MCP3008 object
        mcp = MCP.MCP3008(spi, cs)

        # Create an analog input channel on Pin 0
        chan = AnalogIn(mcp, MCP.P0)

        while x<10:
            # read adc channel 0
            reading = chan.value
            input.append(reading)
            x+=1

        return input

async def main():
   srv = Server(components=[MoistureSensor("moisture_sensor")])
   await srv.serve()

if __name__ == "__main__":
   asyncio.run(main())
```

You can modify this example code as necessary.

Now, go back to your robot's page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and navigate to the **CONFIG** tab, then to the **REMOTES** sub-tab.

> Add your sensor server as a remote part, called `my-sensor-server`:

Author: ```suggestion
Add your sensor server as a [remote part](/manage/parts-and-remotes/) called `my-sensor-server`:
```

{
  // "components": [ board & motor ... ] ,
  // "remotes" [ my-sensor-server ... ] ,
  "processes": [
    {
      "id": "run-sensor-server",
      "log": true,
      "name": "sudo",
      "args": [
        "-u",
        "<my_username>",
        "python",
        "sensor.py"
      ],
      "cwd": "/home/<my_username>/plant-watering-robot"
    }
  ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Add Python Control Code

Follow these instructions to start working on your Python Control Code:

1. Navigate to your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com), and click on the **CODE SAMPLE** tab.
Follow the instructions in this tab.
2. Click **COPY CODE** to copy a code sample that establishes a connection with your robot when run.
3. Paste this code sample into a new file in your `plant-watering-robot` directory.
4. Name the file <file>plant-watering-robot.py</file>, and save it.
  
For example, run the following commands to create and open the file:

``` shell
cd plant-watering-robot
touch plant-watering-robot.py
nano plant-watering-robot.py
```

Now, you can add code into <file>plant-watering-robot.py</file> to write the logic that defines your plant watering system.

> <img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/main-py.png" alt="The main.py function from your robot's Code Sample tab, ready to edit." style="max-width:800px" />

Author: ```suggestion
You can start by adding code into the `main()` function of the program, after connecting to your robot and before closing the connection.
```

- An [Adafruit MCP3008 ADC](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00NAY3RB2?psc=1&ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_product_details)
- A [Motor Speed Controller](https://www.amazon.com/CHENBO-Trigger-Adjustment-Electronic-Controller/dp/B099RF72R1/ref=asc_df_B099RF72R1/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=532384528241&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=11376239784428845641&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-1410298730875&th=1)
- A Breadboard
- 9V Battery
- Plant Box
- Water Cup or Box

Before starting this tutorial, follow the [Raspberry Pi Setup Guide](/installation/prepare/rpi-setup/) to prepare your Pi to run `viam-server`.
Make sure your Pi is flashed with a Viam-compatible operating system, and that you are able to SSH into it.

## Set Up your Plant Watering Robot

Before programming the Pi to make the plant watering robot functional, you need to physically set up the plant watering robot by wiring the different parts together.

> You will set up the robot to receive signals from the capacitive soil moisture sensor, and signal to the peristaltic pump when it is time to pump water from the water's box to the plant's box.

Author: ```suggestion
You will set up the robot to receive signals from the capacitive soil moisture sensor and signal to the peristaltic pump when it is time to pump water from the water's box to the plant's box.
```

    }
  ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Add Python Control Code

Follow these instructions to start working on your Python Control Code:

1. Navigate to your robot's page in [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com), and click on the **CODE SAMPLE** tab.
Follow the instructions in this tab.
2. Click **COPY CODE** to copy a code sample that establishes a connection with your robot when run.
3. Paste this code sample into a new file in your `plant-watering-robot` directory.
4. Name the file <file>plant-watering-robot.py</file>, and save it.
  
For example, run the following commands to create and open the file:

``` shell
cd plant-watering-robot
touch plant-watering-robot.py
nano plant-watering-robot.py
```

Now, you can add code into <file>plant-watering-robot.py</file> to write the logic that defines your plant watering system.

<img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/main-py.png" alt="The main.py function from your robot's Code Sample tab, ready to edit." style="max-width:800px" />

<br>
</br>

Use the Viam [motor](/components/motor#api) and [sensor](/components/sensor#control-your-sensor-with-viams-client-sdk-libraries) API methods.

> Determine at what [analog value from the Soil Moisture readings](#test-your-soil-moisture-readings-on-your-pi) you want to water your plant.

Author: ```suggestion
Determine at what [analog value from the Soil Moisture readings](#test-your-soil-moisture-readings-on-your-pi) you want to water your plant, as your thirsty plant's average moisture reading might differ from our example value of `950`.
```

tags: ["raspberry pi", "app", "board", "motor"]
# SMES: Olivia Miller
---

![Picture of the plant watering robot on a desk.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/plant-watering-robot.png)

Building a useful robot doesn't have to require complicated code or expensive equipment.
With a Raspberry Pi and some cheap, basic hardware, you can keep your plants healthy and happy from anywhere in the world!

Follow this tutorial to learn how to set up an automatic plant watering system:

1.  [Complete the physical assembly and wiring](/#set-up-your-plant-watering-robot).
2. [Create and connect to the robot](#configure-the-components-of-your-robot-in-the-viam-app).
3. [Configure your robot's components](#configure-the-components-of-your-robot-in-the-viam-app).
4. [Configure a custom Capacitive Soil Moisture sensor component](#configure-the-capacitive-soil-moisture-sensor-as-a-custom-sensor-component-model).
5. [Write code utilizing the Viam Python SDK to control the plant watering robot](#add-python-control-code).

The tutorial uses the following hardware, but you can adjust it as needed:

- A Raspberry Pi with SD card

> - A [Capacitive Soil Moisture Sensor](https://www.amazon.com/KeeYees-Sensitivity-Moisture-Watering-Manager/dp/B07QXZC8TQ/ref=asc_df_B07QXZC8TQ/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=343238573411&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=14606440922488452520&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-757549749596&psc=1&tag=&ref=&adgrpid=71762478951&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvadid=343238573411&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=14606440922488452520&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-757549749596)

Author: ```suggestion
- A [Capacitive Soil Moisture Sensor](https://www.amazon.com/KeeYees-Sensitivity-Moisture-Watering-Manager/dp/B07QXZC8TQ)
```

> - A [Peristaltic Pump](https://www.amazon.com/Gikfun-Peristaltic-Connector-Aquarium-Analytic/dp/B01IUVHB8E/ref=asc_df_B01IUVHB8E/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=198093101467&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=13835398343702336934&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-384674250225&psc=1) motor and [tubing](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08H1ZD5VZ?psc=1&ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_product_details)

Author: ```suggestion
- A [Peristaltic Pump](https://www.amazon.com/Gikfun-Peristaltic-Connector-Aquarium-Analytic/dp/B01IUVHB8E) motor and [tubing](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08H1ZD5VZ?psc=1&)
```

> - An [Adafruit MCP3008 ADC](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00NAY3RB2?psc=1&ref=ppx_yo2ov_dt_b_product_details)

Author: ```suggestion
- An [Adafruit MCP3008 ADC](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00NAY3RB2?psc=1)
```

> - A [Motor Speed Controller](https://www.amazon.com/CHENBO-Trigger-Adjustment-Electronic-Controller/dp/B099RF72R1/ref=asc_df_B099RF72R1/?tag=hyprod-20&linkCode=df0&hvadid=532384528241&hvpos=&hvnetw=g&hvrand=11376239784428845641&hvpone=&hvptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9067609&hvtargid=pla-1410298730875&th=1)

Author: ```suggestion
- A [Motor Speed Controller](https://www.amazon.com/High-Power-Transistor-Controller-MELIFE-Electronic/dp/B09XKCD8HS)
```

- A Breadboard

> - 9V Battery

Author: ```suggestion
- A [9V Battery](https://www.amazon.com/dp/B08BRJQQSL/) with [wire leads](https://www.amazon.com/Battery-Hard-Shell-Connector-Insulated-Wires/dp/B07WTYS1PM/)
```

    time.sleep(1)
```

Run the code as follows:

``` shell
sudo python3 adctesting.py
```

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

If running this code returns `ImportError: No module named busio`, try again after reinstalling `adafruit-blinka`:

``` shell
sudo pip3 install --force-reinstall adafruit-blinka
```

{{% /alert %}}

Now, you should see the Moisture Sensor values outputted by the MCP3008 in the range of `0` to `1023`.
Test your sensor by putting it in air, water, and different soils to see how the values change.

![Terminal output of capacitive soil moisture sensor values.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/moisture-sensor-output.png)

### Configure the Components of your Robot in the Viam app

Follow [this guide](/installation/install/) to install `viam-server` on your pi, create a new robot, and connect to it on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com).

Then, navigate to your new robot's page on the app and click on the **CONFIG** tab.

First, add your Pi as a [board component](/components/board/) by creating a new component with **type** `board` and **model** `pi`:

{{< tabs name="Configure an Pi Board" >}}
{{% tab name="Config Builder" %}}

> <img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/pi-board-config-builder.png" alt="Creation of a pi board in the Viam app config builder." style="max-width:800px" />

Reviewer 2: I'm not entirely sure why specifying max-width on these images makes it ignore the available width in the tab but I think this shoudl fix it. If not, just not specifiying max-width seemed to do the right thing for me
```suggestion
![Creation of a pi board in the Viam app config builder.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/pi-board-config-builder.png)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  "components": [
    {
      "name": "local",
      "type": "board",
      "model": "pi",
      "attributes": {},
      "depends_on": []
    }, // Motor JSON ...
  ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

<br>

Then, add your pump as a [motor component](/components/motor/) by adding a new component with **type** `motor` and **model** `gpio`.

Add your board (in this example, named `local`) to this component's dependencies (`depends_on`) and set the attributes **Max RPM** to `1000` and **PWM**  to `12` (the pin # that you wired the PWM to).

{{< tabs name="Configure an Pump Motor" >}}
{{% tab name="Config Builder" %}}

> <img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/pump-motor-config-builder.png" alt="Creation of a pump motor in the Viam app config builder." style="max-width:800px" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Creation of a pump motor in the Viam app config builder.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/pump-motor-config-builder.png)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
// Board JSON ... },
{
    "name": "water-pump",
    "type": "motor",
    "model": "gpio",
    "attributes": {
    "pins": {
        "a": "",
        "b": "",
        "dir": "",
        "pwm": "12"
    },
    "board": "local",
    "max_rpm": 1000
    },
    "depends_on": [
    "local"
    ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Click **SAVE CONFIG**.

Now, if you navigate to your robot's **CONTROL** tab, you should be able to control the motor by setting the power and direction of rotation and clicking the **RUN** button:

> <img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/pump-motor-control.png" alt="Creation of a pump motor in the Viam app config builder." style="max-width:800px" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Creation of a pump motor in the Viam app config builder.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/pump-motor-control.png)
```

    # Implement the Viam Sensor API's get_readings() method
    async def get_readings(self):
        x = 0
        input = []

        # Create the SPI bus
        spi = busio.SPI(clock=board.SCK, MISO=board.MISO, MOSI=board.MOSI)

        # Create the cs (chip select)
        cs = digitalio.DigitalInOut(board.D25)

        # Create the MCP3008 object
        mcp = MCP.MCP3008(spi, cs)

        # Create an analog input channel on Pin 0
        chan = AnalogIn(mcp, MCP.P0)

        while x<10:
            # read adc channel 0
            reading = chan.value
            input.append(reading)
            x+=1

        return input

async def main():
   srv = Server(components=[MoistureSensor("moisture_sensor")])
   await srv.serve()

if __name__ == "__main__":
   asyncio.run(main())
```

You can modify this example code as necessary.

#### Add the `MoistureSensor` Remote

Now, go back to your robot's page on [the Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and navigate to the **CONFIG** tab, then to the **REMOTES** sub-tab.

Add your sensor server as a [remote part](/manage/parts-and-remotes/) called `my-sensor-server`:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Config Builder" %}}

> <img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/sensor-remote-config-builder.png" alt="Creation of a custom sensor remote in the Viam app config builder." style="max-width:800px" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Creation of a custom sensor remote in the Viam app config builder."](../../img/plant-watering-pi/sensor-remote-config-builder.png)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
// "components": [ board & motor ... ],
"remotes": [
    {
      "name": "my-sensor-server",
      "address": "localhost:9090"
    }
]
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

#### Add the `MoistureSensor` Process

Then, navigate to the **PROCESSES** subtab and create a process called `run-sensor-server`:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab name="Config Builder" %}}

> <img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/sensor-process-config-builder.png" alt="Creation of a process to run the sensor remote server in the Viam app config builder." style="max-width:800px" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Creation of a process to run the sensor remote server in the Viam app config builder.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/sensor-process-config-builder.png)
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab name="JSON Template" %}}

```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
{
  // "components": [ board & motor ... ] ,
  // "remotes" [ my-sensor-server ... ] ,
  "processes": [
    {
      "id": "run-sensor-server",
      "log": true,
      "name": "sudo",
      "args": [
        "-u",
        "<my_username>",
        "python",
        "sensor.py"
      ],
      "cwd": "/home/<my_username>/plant-watering-robot"
    }
  ]
}
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Modify the `"args"` and `"cwd"` to match the path to your `plant-watering-robot` directory on your Pi.

Click **SAVE CONFIG**.
Now, when you navigate to your robot's **CONTROL** tab, you should be able to see your sensor readings:

> <img src="../../img/plant-watering-pi/sensor-reading-control.png" alt="Readings from a soil moisture sensor in the Viam app CONTROL tab." style="max-width:800px" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Readings from a soil moisture sensor in the Viam app CONTROL tab.](../../img/plant-watering-pi/sensor-reading-control.png)
```
